#summary Entrelacs system native capabilities

=== Introduction ===

We anticipate that an achieved _Entrelacs system_ will demonstrate many outstanding *native* capabilities in comparison with a legacy computer system. To name a few:

=== information relativity ====
Every piece of information is _"relative-able"_. That is, it can be stated relatively to a referential. More specifically, the relation between a fact and its referential can itself been comprehended relatively to a *meta-referential* (_abstraction_).

All in all, there is only one absolute referential of valid relations.

<[RelativeMachine More ...]>

=== information conceptualizing ===

Information *deduping* is _transparent_ and performed at system level. Each piece of information is present only once in the whole system. This representation is literally a mapping of the corresponding pure concept of information.

=== information self indexation ===

Information is *self-indexed* and *fully connected*. One can retrieve in a efficient way (O(n)?) all the knowledge related to some given information.

=== native persistent data structures ===

Information may be mostly stored in [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistent_data_structure persistent data structures]^W^.

=== native orthogonal persistence ===

Information persistence may be easily [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orthogonal_persistence orthogonal]^W^.

*Memory management* may be transparent as well. Data caching (in high memory levels) and [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garbage_collection_(computer_science) garbage collection]^W^ may be transparent and full-scope system process.

=== native memoization ===

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memoization Memoization]^W^ may be easily made orthogonal. It could take the form of an automated process  performed by the system, everytime, everywhere.

=== native fine-grained virtualization ===

Any computation process may be easily [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtualization virtualized]^W^, that is performed in a _[RelativeMachine relative]_ environment. It makes a *top-down security* scheme easily feasible.


=== Conclusion ===

Because of these anticipated capabilities (also listed [EntrelacsProperties in this page]), we consider the Entrelacs paradigm as the missing link up to a much clever generation of computers. Most data computing disciplines will get major benefits by transposing their works into Entrelacs systems. For example:
     * Adapted programming languages will exhibit outstanding abilities like system-level persistent introspection and intercession, computation back-tracking, fine-grained virtualization, etc. <[EntrelacsLanguage more ...]>
     * Adapted _Artificial Learning_ and _Knowledge Representation_ algorithms will work across different abstraction and complexity scales and will be able to cross-cut ontologies across the whole information set. <[EntrelacsAI more ...]>

=== Pragmatic note ===

We acknowledge that most systems may benefit from natively managing complex objects like raw data and tuples in addition to regular arrows. We consider such pragmatic systems to be still considered as _Entrelacs systems_ as long as they manage such exotic objects in the same way as their arrows made equivalent constructs, especially in terms of uniqueness, immutability, and connectivity. <[EntrelacsEquivalences more ...]>