#summary The best Entrelacs system reference design consists in you, a pen, and a sheet of paper.

The [EntrelacsParadigm] says "let's map information into arrows".

Basically, one takes information to pieces until one gets a structure of oriented pairs of atomistic concepts. This is not really new as it's very similar with Lisp's s-expressions and list concept.

However, one only considers the pure mathematical object behind each atomistic concept and one handles as it is: unique. So one maps each concept onto one and only one discrete sign ([EntrelacsEquivalences that is a discrete arrows structure]) in the whole information space.

For example, even if one represents some statistics which contains repeatedly  the natural number "2", one puts only once a sign to represent "2" on a physical support.

Arrows are *singletons* as well. So one projects each relationship concept onto one and only one arrow, coming out a "tail" and going to a "head". The tail and head may be a previously projected discrete sign OR some previously projected arrow.

You can experiment the arrow paradigm with a sheet of paper and a pencil. Please try. It's fun!

 * First choose an interesting material, like some intricate set of predicates, says: "cows make milk", "babies drink milk", "cows drink water", "drink is a verb", "water boils at 100°C", etc.).
 * Use words or numbers or littles doodles as signs to represent atomistic concepts.
   * But remember, put each concept only once on your whole page.
 * Then draw arrows between signs
 * Then draw arrows between arrows, layer by layer, like "make->milk", "drink->water" ... then "cows->(make->milk)", and so on.
 * But again, never do as with _Writing_, don't draw the (from "make" to "milk") arrow more than once! Your drawing is not an arrows structure if several arrows share the same ends ^(or several _entrelacs_ share the same topology)^.

Once you finished, you may enjoy your work.
* Check how any value, any edge and any subsequent link is connected to all the information it belongs to.
* Notice how you can add more arrows, again and again, with no need to erase or modify anything already in place.

That are arrows specific features.

Now for poetry: Actually, you may replace signs by entrelacs, that is discrete closed structures of arrows. That means you may only see arrows on your page and yet still have stored workable information.

So what have we done? Did we invent a new data structure? Not really. We rather map a data structure to a drawing, but in a radically different way than the one we're accustomed to. To do so, we used a pen and a paper sheet as a device to store arrows, namely an [ArrowsSpace arrows space].

With some some self-discipline, a sheet of paper actually makes a quite good _arrow space_.

Unfortunately, that's not so simple with computer hardware. So one must develop a simulated device (a software version of an [ArrowsSpace arrows space]) on top of an existing computer platform.